Welcome to Moviecaps.
Today I will show you a Drama, Crime, Biography
film from 2016, that's based on a true story,
titled Snowden.
Spoilers ahead!
Watch out and take care.
It is 2004.
Edward Snowden is doing military training
in Fort Benning, Georgia.
One morning when jumping out of bed he breaks
his leg.
The doctor explains that he has been walking
on 2 broken legs for weeks and that his bones
are filled with microfractures.
Ed asks when he would be able to resume training,
but the doctor says that if he ever lands
on those legs again his bones will turn to
powder and says that he will authorize administrative
discharge.
Fast forward to 2006.
Since he cannot do field work, Ed decides
to join the intelligence division of the CIA.
He is assessed by the Senior Instructor, Corbin
O'Brian.
Ed explains that most of his family has worked
for the government and that he truly wants
to serve the people.
Seeing that Ed is highly intelligent and motivated,
Corbin accepts him into his class at "The
Hill", a CIA training center in Virginia.
While searching for his class, he meets Hank
Forrester, who is working on an encryption
machine called Sigaba, which is a successor
to Enigma and has never been cracked.
Hank is an engineer, instructor and counselor
for the trainees on the base.
The two have a geeky banter between them before
Hank sends him off to class.
In the first lesson, Corbin has the class
take a proficiency test to create a covert
communications network to be deployed in their
hometown, backed up, destroyed and restored.
The average completion time is 5 hours and
if you take more than 8 hours, you fail.
Ed finishes the test in 38 minutes and Corbin
is impressed.
At a coffee shop in Washington, Ed finally
meets his online girlfriend Lindsey.
The two go for a walk and along the way she
takes a few photos.
When asked, Ed says he works for the State
Department.
She says they do not have an office in Virginia,
which is where he always visits her website
from.
She understands that he cannot disclose where
he works.
He's surprised she knows how to do an IP trace.
During the afternoon, they exchange political
views as they walk through a peaceful protest
against the policies of President Bush and
the recent explosions.
They seem to have opposing views, but still
get along well.
Back in class, Corbin shows a newspaper article
that says, "Bush lets US spy on callers without
courts."
He asks if it's constitutional to bypass the
courts.
One student says that the 4th Amendment prevents
searches and seizures without a warrant.
Corbin reasons that sometimes the warrants
have to be issued by secret courts so they
don't tip off the suspects.
After class, Hank tells Ed that he used to
be a top NSA operative.
He managed to develop an algorithm for only
3 million dollars which analyzes terabytes
of data that would take a human hundreds of
years.
It distinguishes between domestic and foreign
threats and encrypts the irrelevant information
so people can keep their privacy.
They did not use it and instead developed
a program modeled after his without filters
or automation that cost 4 billion dollars.
Later, he asks Corbin if all intelligence
programs are specifically targeted, and he
confirms.
Corbin believes that the biggest threats will
come from foreign hackers and that without
minds like Ed's, the country will be torn
apart and that sending him to fight wars over
sand and oil would be a waste.
Ed is taken aback by his honesty and Corbin
says that you do not have to agree with politicians
to be a patriot.
The year is 2007 and Ed is now working in
Geneva with diplomatic cover to maintain CIA
's computer security network.
His supervisor is not pleased that he hacked
their HR website.
Ed reasons that it is his job to find vulnerabilities.
The man says that he was not asked to do this
and that Ed now has a derog on his file.
Later, as he is shredding some disks, Gabriel
approaches him and takes him into his office.
Ed is hesitant because he's only allowed to
see the finished file, but Gabriel reasons
that it doesn't make a difference if he sees
how it's put together.
He logs into X keyscore and types in some
keywords and receives messages in return.
Ed asks how this is possible, and he explains
that the system works like Google, but also
searches everyone's private data like emails,
chats and text messages.
Ed is at a high-level lunch with an undercover
CIA Agent who informs him that Corbin has
given him clearance to begin field operations
and that he is tasked with spotting potential
targets for illegal activity.
His social skills are not the best so he fails
miserably.
Lindsey sees this and sets him up with a banker
named Marwan.
Later, Gabriel looks up Marwan and says he
is the cleanest Pakistani he has ever seen,
with no shady connections.
Ed asks if they could check his family and
Gabriel clicks on his sister-in-law.
A video pops up and Gabriel says it's live
from her laptop, which was turned off, but
the camera and microphone were activated by
the program.
Ed is shocked and says to stick with the family
in Geneva.
Gabriel looks up Marwan's daughter, he does
not need a warrant and can look up anyone.
He looks at her Facebook account and finds
out her boyfriend is cheating on her and he
and his mother are here illegally.
The CIA agent says that Marwan's bank handles
Russian and Saudi money, and Ed is shocked
that things are moving so fast.
Marwan says that his daughter's boyfriend
has been deported and she took too many sleeping
pills but she's alright.
When they leave, Marwan is drunk and the CIA
Agent instructs Ed to call the police and
tell them he saw Marwan driving so he can
be put in jail for a week.
They will then offer him a deal he can't refuse
because he needs to be with his family.
Ed refuses and the CIA agent says he will
call the police himself.
Ed tries to stop him but gets threatened.
Some time later, Ed has put tape on every
webcam and when Lindsey asks why, he says
some Russian hackers might be watching them.
She takes it off and says it's creepy, but
it does not bother her because she has nothing
to hide.
He also tells her that he resigned from CIA
due to personal differences.
It is 2009.
Ed works for the NSA at Yokota Air Base in
Tokyo, Japan.
He is working on a backup system called "Epic
Shelter" in case some of their facilities
get destroyed.
When Japanese officials show up, he shows
them the live drone feeds which they love.
The NSA asks for their help to spy on the
Japanese, but it's against their laws so they
don't approve.
The NSA tapped the entire country anyway.
They also slipped malicious code into their
power grids, dams, hospitals, and other infrastructure
so they can just shut everything down when
they are no longer allies.
They did the same thing in Mexico, Germany,
Brazil, and Austria.
They also spy on world and industry leaders,
tracking their business deals and sex scandals
to give the US leverage in negotiations.
Ed realizes that this is actually about economic
and social control and that they are just
using radicalism as an excuse.
The only thing he is protecting is the supremacy
of the government.
After that he worked on radical watch.
He watched many Americans and had to keep
reminding himself that he could prevent a
dirty explosive attack and save thousands
of lives.
He had to watch not only the bad guys, but
also their contacts and everyone they interact
with.
3 steps from anyone with 40 contacts is a
list of 2.5 million people, the vast majority
of whom are regular people.
The NSA tracks every cell phone in the world,
not just those of radicals, but of everyone.
Japan was difficult for him and Lindsey because
he was not allowed to talk about work.
One day he sees her editing lewd pictures
of herself and says she should delete them.
She asks if it's the Russian hackers again,
but he says it's classified and he cannot
talk about it because it's an issue of national
security.
She feels isolated because he works 12 hour
days and comes home depressed and miserable.
They get into an argument and she goes back
to the US.
3 months later he returns to the US and they
get back together, with him promising her
to change.
Ed goes back to work for the CIA as Solutions
Consultant.
He was glad to be back in the States, but
as he kept working he learned more and more
disturbing facts, like when 3 high-ranking
NSA officials filed complaints about the abuse
and overreach of surveillance systems, they
were met with serious backlash such as the
FBI raiding their homes.
And when a whistleblower turned to the press,
seeing that his attempts to change the system
from within were futile, he was charged under
the Espionage Act to send a message to anyone
who would try the same.
The entire intelligence community was shocked
by this.
Ed is out hunting with Corbin.
He is told about a new program in Hawaii,
spying against the Chinese.
When Ed raises concerns about mass surveillance,
Corbin states that there has not been a World
War 3 because they have generally used their
power for the good of the world.
Corbin also says that people already catalog
their lives on the web but Ed says that they
only share part of it and do not know that
the rest is being monitored.
Corbin introduces him to Jim Lowell, Deputy
Director of the NSA.
Jim praises Ed's work on Epic Shelter and
says it is brilliant.
As Corbin and Jim talk, Ed learns that Epic
Shelter is already being used to improve drone
pilot response times.
With this new job in Hawaii he would have
even more access.
Ed takes another lie detector test.
When asked if he has used programs he's unauthorized
for, she seems to catch him in a lie.
At home, Ed tells Lindsey about his job offer
in Hawaii and tells her that he will do whatever
they both deem necessary.
He goes back to the kitchen but collapses
and has a seizure.
The doctor says it's epilepsy, prescribes
him medication, and recommends him to rest.
In the parking lot outside the hospital, Lindsey
decides that Hawaii would be good for Ed because
it might be less stressful due to the warmer
climate.
It is 2012.
Ed arrives at his new job in Hawaii to counter
spy on the Chinese.
When he walks in, there's a thorough security
check.
Gabriel, who has been working there for 3
years, notices him.
They work in a secret underground base.
Gabriel leads him into his office and introduces
him to his boss Trevor, and Patrick who will
be working with him.
They watch live drone strikes of suspected
radicals.
Ed's job is to geolocate them.
They track the "bad guys" cellphones, sometimes
just the sim card.
Ed asks how they know the bad guy is carrying
the phone and Patrick says they don't but
Trevor interrupts him and says they get the
information from people in the field.
They say that the program is called Epic Shelter
and Ed says that he built it and that he had
another use in mind - to create a centralized
database for all the intelligence programs
called "Heartbeat".
On a hiking trip with Lindsey, he admits that
he hasn't been taking his epilepsy medication
because it makes him groggy and he needs to
be sharp for work.
She asks what makes his job more important
than his life.
One day at work, everyone in the office is
watching a live Congress meeting where the
subject of government spying and data surveillance
is addressed and lied about.
Ed shows his coworkers the number of emails
and Skype calls Heartbeat has indexed by country
so far.
They are shocked to find that they are collecting
more data on US citizens than on countries
like Russia.
Patrick tells him to be careful because he
could be seen as rocking the boat.
Trevor walks in on them and tells Ed not to
let anyone unauthorized in anymore.
Some time later, Corbin tells Ed he did a
good job tracking down 200 Chinese IPs in
his first 4 months.
Also heartbeat.
Corbin knows he lied on the last polygraph
and asks him the same question.
Ed admits that he checked whether Lindsey
was cheating on him.
Corbin assures that she hasn't cheated on
him and Ed realizes that his girlfriend and
he are being actively monitored.
He goes home and tells this to Lindsey and
instructs her to use encrypted email.
He also suspects the house may be bugged and
suggests for her to go back to Maryland, but
she decides to stay as it would look suspicious
otherwise.
The next day he goes to work with a Rubik's
Cube.
He sits down and, while Patrick is distracted,
starts copying all the heartbeat data onto
an SD card.
Shortly after he finishes, they come back
and he drops the SD card.
Patrick notices it and steps on it so Trevor
doesn't.
Ed tells him in sign language that they may
never see eachother again.
He hides the SD card in the Rubik's Cube.
When he goes through security, he tosses the
cube to a guard and gets it back after being
scanned so he manages to smuggle the data
out.
He emails a journalist and they arrange to
meet at The Mira Hotel in Hong Kong.
Over the coming days he and a couple journalists
slowly release information about government
surveillance.
On June 9th, 2013, he officially reveals himself
as the one who leaked the information to avoid
a witch hunt among the other employees.
His passport got revoked while he was in Russia,
on his way to Latin America.
He got stuck there and Russia granted him
asylum, so he has been living there ever since.
The US even grounded the Bolivian president's
plane because they suspected Snowden was on
board.
Snowden is willing to face a fair trial, but
as long as the Espionage Act is used against
whistleblowers, that's not possible.
If he had the chance to do it all over again,
he would, because it has sparked a public
debate, and the ability to question the government
and hold it accountable is one of the principles
upon which the United States of America was
founded.
The End.
Thank you for watching!
Subscribe if you'd like to see more videos
like this.